For Michal review (#1)
ssweck/tmp-solana-ibc-post: solana-ibc-story.md

transaciton data and fits easily within the ‘relatively small’ heap.

Implementing [the Inter-Blockchain Communication (IBC) protocol](https://www.ibcprotocol.dev/) is however not a trivial task.
With all the encapsulation, block header signatures, state proofs
etc. that the IBC core needs to handle, the contract can easily surpass
those limits.  In this post, I go through some of the work we had to
do to overcome various challenges and successfully bring IBC onto Solana.

## The Guest blockchain and scope of the present article

Fist of all, Solana doesn’t meet each of IBC’s host requirements listed in the [ICS 24
document](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/main/spec/core/ics-024-host-requirements/README.md).
Specifically, it offers neither state proofs nor introspection.  The former is
required to create membership and non-membership proofs.  The latter is needed
to perform an IBC handshake when establishing an IBC connection.  This is
why we’ve ended up creating [the guest
blockchain](https://docs.picasso.network/technology/ibc/solana/#ibc-requirements--the-need-for-a-guest-blockchain)
which runs atop Solana.  While an interesting topic by itself, this post

> is not about the guest blockchain, as the guest blockchain has been detailed [here](https://research.composable.finance/t/crossing-the-cross-blockchain-interoperability-chasm/33).

Reviewer: Would this be better as 

```suggestion
is not about the guest blockchain, as it has been detailed [here](https://research.composable.finance/t/crossing-the-cross-blockchain-interoperability-chasm/33).
```

Otherwise we repeat ‘the guest blockchain’ three times in close succession.

}
```

What this does is allocate a 40 KB buffer, which is larger than the default heap
size.  Therefore, executing it in a transaction fails.  However,
when executing a transaction consisting of two instructions, the first
calling the Compute Budget program with `RequestHeapFrame(102400)`
operation and the second calling the above test program, the program…
fails just as before.

Even though a higher heap is requested, the Solana program will have access
to the first 32 KiB only.  Well, sort of.  It turns out the default
allocator *assumes* that the heap is 32 KiB.  Even though the virtual
machine allots more space, [the default allocator will use the first
32 KiB
only](https://docs.rs/solana-program/1.18.9/src/solana_program/entrypoint.rs.html#168).
In the `BumpAllocator` presented above, this corresponds to the use of the
`HEAP_LENGTH` constant.

### <a name="getting-heap-size"></a> Getting heap size

> Getting the heap size shouldn’t be a big problem.  Right?  One would hope to simply figure out the size

Reviewer: Here the ‘that’ referred to default allocator assuming the size. Perhaps this would be better as something like:

```suggestion
Eliminating the hard-coded heap size shouldn’t be a big problem.  Right?  One would hope to simply figure out the size
```

use global_alloc::{global_verifier, set_global_verifier};
```

Since the Solana runtime is single-threaded, no consideration for
thread-safety is necessary.  Paradoxically, this may make things more
complicated by forcing another version of the code for non-Solana
builds (e.g. tests).  Another aspect which makes things interesting is
Solana’s lack of support for atomic operations (e.g. [`AtomicPtr`
type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/sync/atomic/struct.AtomicPtr.html)).

> The mere existence of them on Solana, even if they are never executed, causes the

Reviewer: ‘on Solana’ here is wrong I think. The point is that the instructions never appear on Solana. They are present in the smart contract and that’s what causes the smart contract upload to fail.  Perhaps
```suggestion
The mere existence of them in the smart contract, even if they are dead code, causes the
```

This brings the story to the payload size limit.  As aforementioned,
a Solana transaction is limited to 1232 bytes.  This needs to be enough
to store the sender’s signature, the smart contract address and all account
information passed to the smart contract, as well as the call’s instruction data
(i.e. the request passed to the smart contract).  The overhead may be
reduced with [versioned
transactions](https://solanacookbook.com/guides/versioned-transactions.html)
but, no matter what, instruction data is limited to around 1100 bytes.
For simple contracts this is enough, but when implementing IBC we need
to handle requests which are much larger.

For example, messages sent to update Tendermint’s light client store
validator signatures.  As discussed previously, such a signature is
over a hundred bytes, and with multiple signatures present in the request,
the transaction size limit is quickly reached.

The solution we used for this is analogous to how we handled the
signatures.  We’ve created [a helper `write-account`
program](https://github.com/ComposableFi/emulated-light-client/tree/master/solana/write-account)
which allows arbitrary data to be written to an account.  If a caller

> needs to pass instruction data which doesn’t fit in the Solana transaction,

Reviewer: I mean… ‘Data’ is plural, no?
